---
title: "A panoramic photograph of the Galactic bar from long period variables"
collection: talks
type: "Contributed talk"
permalink: /talks/2024-07-NAM
venue: "National Astronomy Meeting, University of Hull"
date: 2024-07
location: "Hull, UK"
---

[Slide here](https://Hanyuan0908.github.io/talks/NAM24_20240715.pdf)

Abstract:
Knowledge of the Galactic bar is crucial to fully understanding the chemo-dynamical evolution of the Milky Way because the Galactic bar affects both the gravitational potential at the inner Galaxy and the ecosystem of the Milky Way. However, little discussion is devoted to the bar properties through direct observation of resolved stars in the bar due to the imprecise distances and heavy extinction. Thanks to the variables stars published from Gaia DR3, we can now shed light on the resolved stars in the Galactic bar. We use the low-amplitude, long-period variable (LA-LPV) stars from the Gaia DR3 LPV catalogue, which enable us to assign luminosity distances to these stars through the period-luminosity relation. We present an LA-LPV sample that covers the Galactic disc and bulge. A panoramic picture of the inner Galaxy is revealed in full 6D phase space on the near side and the far side of the bar. We constrain the kinematics field of the Galactic bar on both sides of the Galaxy and find consistency with N-body simulations. We provide a newly developed method to measure the dynamical length of the Galactic bar using purely kinematics. Meanwhile, we also estimate the pattern speed of the Milky Way bar using the continuity equation and yield a result of ~34.1 km/s/kpc. Further, we study the orbital families of the bar-supporting orbits and find a significant population of the “banana” orbits, which are the main building blocks of the Galactic X-shaped structure.
