---
title: "What is rotating in the early Milky Way: a disc or a halo"
collection: talks
type: "Contributed talk"
permalink: /talks/2024-05-28-Bologna
venue: "The Assembly Tale of the Milky Way, INAF"
date: 2024-05-28
location: "Bologna, Italy"
---

[Slide here](https://Hanyuan0908.github.io/talks/Bologna_20240528.pdf)

Abstract:
The Galactic disc attracted most of the attention for research in the last decades due to its complicated structures, dynamics, and chemical evolution, which all are important tracers for the assembly history of the Milky Way. The discussion about the metal-weak thick disc (MWTD) cycles in the community for decades. Recently, the large sample of very metal-poor (-3<[M/H]<-2) stars with planner orbits in the Pristine survey clues that the Galactic disc extends to the very metal-poor regime, and this rapidly catches the community’s attention. Thanks to the release of the GaiaXP spectrum, we can revisit the problem with a larger and more homogenous spectroscopic sample. In this work, we use the metallicity derived from the GaiaXP spectrum and kinematics from Gaia DR3 to analyse the chemo-kinematic evolution of the Galactic disc both qualitatively and quantitively. We argue that the Milky Way are less likely to form its disc in the very metal-poor regime, and the stars with planner orbits are attributed to the prograde halo. The very metal-poor halo in the Milky Way shows a prograde signature and consistently evolves from the very metal-poor to the metal-poor regime, hinting at some connections to the known in-situ halo, Aurora/Proto-Galaxy. Our results are consistent with various cosmological simulations.

