---
title: "Radial migration in the Galactic disc with a decelerating bar"
collection: talks
type: "Contributed talk"
permalink: /talks/2025-06-CMU
venue: "Gravity in the Local Group, Carnegie Mellon University"
date: 2025-06-05
location: "Pittsuburgh, Pennsylvania, US"
---

[Slide here](https://Hanyuan0908.github.io/talks/Pittsburge_2025_RM.pdf)

Abstract:
The chemical cartography of the Galactic disc has been mapped in great detail by combining Gaia data with other spectroscopic surveys. This comprehensive mapping provides critical insights into the history of the Milky Way. Many intriguing chrono-chemical signatures have been discovered in the Galactic disc, including age-metallicity sequences, [α/Fe]-bimodality, and azimuthal metallicity variations. However, the origins of these signatures remain a topic of active debate. In our study, we focus on the impact of radial migration and the history of the Galactic bar on the chemical signatures of the disc. Radial migration is a process that redistributes stars within the Galactic disc, moving them from their birthplaces to their present-day galactocentric radii. Non-axisymmetric structures in the Galaxy drive this radial migration, with the Galactic bar acting as the primary driver of migration. For instance, as the bar decelerates, the corotation resonance drags stars radially outwards through the expansion of the corotation radius. In this talk, I will discuss the observational signatures of radial migration induced by the slowing Galactic bar. Using a test particle simulation, we demonstrate that stars currently residing near the bar corotation radius can have two distinct origins: inner disc stars that migrated via corotation resonance dragging and stars that formed locally. By applying a simple yet reasonable metallicity enrichment model, we reproduce the observed age-metallicity pattern in the Galactic disc and its dependence on guiding radii. The coexistence of stars from the inner and outer disc around the corotation radius also naturally explains the [α/Fe]-bimodality and its radial dependence. Our simulations further reveal that this radial migration mechanism can create azimuthal chemical patterns due to the unique shape of the corotation resonance orbits. Additionally, assuming this radial migration scenario is the dominant mechanism in the disc, we infer the evolutionary history of the Galactic bar's pattern speed. By applying a data-driven stellar birth radius inference method, we estimate that the Galactic bar formed approximately 6-8 Gyr ago, with an initial pattern speed of 60-100 km/s/kpc, and has decelerated for 50%-70% for the past.

